# MLinvitroTox Tutorial

How to get started with the MLinvitrotox package

## A. Project description



## B. Getting started

In its current form, MLinvitroTox can only be used from a terminal as a command line interface (CLI).

Should you be unfamiliar with Python, conda/mamba and/or git, you can work on a renku session (see below). 


### Prerequisites

To work with MLinvitroTox, you need

- Python 3: TODO link
- mamba / conda: TODO link
- git: TODO Link
- a terminal: TODO link

Working with terminals on Windows can be cumbersome. We recommend to use WSL, the Windows Subsystem for Linux. This gives you access to a full Ubuntu terminal environment. TODO link


### Work from a renku session

A renku session allows you to test and work with MLinvitroTox without having to install Python, mamba and git. 

To start a session, go to the [repository page](https://renkulab.io/projects/expectmine/mlinvitrotox-tutorial/) and press the green Start button on the top right. Starting the session might take a minute. 

It will open a JupyterLab session in your browser. There, you click on the `terminal` button to open a terminal. 

Now, you can directly start with the [Usage section](#usage) below and can skip the setup of the tutorial repository.


### Setup the tutorial repopsitory

If you like to work locally, open a terminal and move to the folder in which you would like to work.

```
cd path/to/work/folder
```

Use git to clone the repository
```
git clone git@gitlab.renkulab.io:expectmine/mlinvitrotox-tutorial.git
cd mlinvitrotox-tutorial
```

Create a conda environment. We recommend to use mamba, an optimized version of conda.

If you need to install mamba (and conda), see [here](https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/mamba-installation.html). 

```
mamba env create -f ./environment.yml
```

Then, activate the environment. This needs to be done each time you work in this repository. 
```
conda activate mlinvitrotox-tutorial
```


## C. Usage

After the repository and the environment are setup, you can get started with analyzing HRMS data.

Activate the environment.
```
conda activate mlinvitrotox-tutorial
```

To show the basic functionality, there is a small sample dataset in the `data` folder, called `sampledata`.


### Extract the SIRIUS data

As the first step, you add the output from [SIRIUS](https://bio.informatik.uni-jena.de/software/sirius/). In addition to the output that is automatically generated by SIRIUS, make sure that you use the option of `export summaries`. 

The SIRIUS data can be provided in two ways:

1. as a folder. Move or copy your SIRIUS output folder to the `data` folder. If you do not have data at the moment, you can skip the moving/copying and extract the sample data.

```
mv /path/to/your/sirius/folder data/
```

or 

```
cp -r /path/to/your/sirius/folder data/
```

You then run the following command to extract it. It is being extracted in the same folder. Here, we use the sample dataset. 

```
itox extract -i data/sampledata
```

If you don't want to move or copy your SIRIUS output, it can also be extracted. You will then need to specify the same path in the load step. 
```
itox extract -i /path/to/your/sirius/folder
```


2. as a zip folder. We recommend to keep the zip filder outside of the repository's directory structure. To extract, run the following command. The data will then be unzipped and extract to the `data/sample` folder.

```
itox extract -i path/to/zipfile/sampledata.zip -o data/
```

Depending on the size of the SIRIUS output, this takes a few seconds up to a several minutes.


### Load the SIRIUS data

Then, the SIRIUS data needs to be loaded, i.e., the predicted fingerprints and other information are collected and stored in the `sirius-pred-fps.csv` file in the specified results folder.

```
itox load -i data/sampledata -o results/sampledata/sirius-pred-fps.csv
```


### Run the models

Run the models on your predicted fingerprints. When you use this command for the first time, it is going to download the model from [zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/13323297). The models are provided as a zipped folder (with the abbreviation `.itox`). 

```
itox run -m mlinvitrotox_model -i results/sampledata/sirius-pred-fps.csv -o results/sampledata
```

or
```
itox run -m mlinvitrotox_model.itox -i results/sampledata/sirius-pred-fps.csv -o results/sampledata
```


### View the results

To view the results, have a look at the output csv files.

TODO explain columns



### More information

All the commands can also be run with `mlinvitrotox` instead `itox`. 

